This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information, or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Recording by Hugh Maguire.
Dracula by Bram Stoker.
Chapter 11. Lucy Wisterna's Diary.
12 September.
How good they all are to me.
I quite love that dear Dr. Van Helsing.
I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers.
He positively frightened me he was so fierce.
And yet he must have been right, for I feel comfort from them already.
Somehow, I do not dread being alone tonight.
And I can go to sleep without fear.
I shall not mind any flapping outside the window.
Oh, the terrible struggle that I have had against sleep so often of late.
The pain of sleeplessness.
Or the pain of the fear of sleep.
And with such unknown horrors as it has for me.
How blessed are some people whose lives have no fears, no dreads.
To whom sleep is a blessing that comes on nightly.
And brings nothing but sweet dreams.
Well, here I am tonight, hoping for sleep.
And lying like Ophelia in the play.
With virgin crants and maiden struments.
I never liked garlic before, but tonight it is delightful.
There is peace in its smell.
I feel sleep coming already.
Good night, everybody.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 13 September.
Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing.
As usual, up to time.
The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting.
The professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.
Let all be put down exactly.
Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock.
It was a lovely morning.
The bright sunshine and all the fresh feeling of early autumn
seemed like the completion of nature's annual work.
The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours.
But had not yet begun to drop from the trees.
When we entered we met Mrs. Westerna.
Coming out of the morning room.
She is always an early riser.
She greeted us warmly and said,
You will be glad to know that Lucy is better.
The dear child is still asleep.
I looked into her room and saw her,
but did not go in lest I should disturb her.
The professor smiled and looked quite jubilant.
He rubbed his hands together and said,
Aha! I thought I had diagnosed the case.
My treatment is working.
To which she replied,
You must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor.
Lucy's state this morning is due in part to me.
How do you mean, ma'am? asked the professor.
Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night
and went into her room.
She was sleeping soundly.
So soundly that even my coming did not wake her.
But the room was awfully stuffy.
There were a lot of those horrible strong-smelling flowers
about everywhere and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck.
I feared that the heavy odour would be too much
for the dear child in her weak state
so I took them all away and opened a bit of the window
to let in a little fresh air.
You will be pleased with her, I am sure.
She moved off into her boudoir
where she usually breakfasted early.
As she had spoken I watched the professor's face
and saw it turn ash and grey.
He had been able to retain his self-command
whilst the poor lady was present
for he knew her state and how mischievous
a shock would be.
He actually smiled on her
as he held open the door for her to pass into her room.
But the instant she disappeared
he pulled me suddenly and forcibly
into the dining room and closed the door.
Then, for the first time in my life
I saw Van Helsing break down.
He raised his hands over his head
in a sort of mute despair
and then beat his palms together in a helpless way.
Finally he sat down on a chair
and putting his hands before his face
began to sob with loud dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart.
Then he raised his arms again
as though appealing to the whole universe.
God, God, God, he said.
What have we done?
What has this poor thing done?
That we are so sore beset.
Is there fate amongst us still?
Send down from the pagan world of old
that such things must be in such a way.
This poor mother, all unknowing
and all for the best as she think
does such thing as lose her daughter, body and soul.
And we must not tell her.
We must not even warn her
before she die, then both die.
Oh, how we are beset.
How are all the powers of devils against us?
Suddenly he jumped to his feet.
Come, he said, come!
We must see an act.
Devils are no devils.
Or all the devils at once, it matters not.
We must fight him all the same.
He went to the hall door for his bag
and together we went up to Lucy's room.
Once again I drew the blind
whilst Van Helsing went towards the bed.
This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face
with the same awful waxen pallor as before.
He wore a look of stern sadness and infinite pity.
As I expected, he murmured
with that hissing inspiration of his which meant so much.
Without a word he went and locked the door
and then began to set out on a little table
the instruments for yet another operation
of transfusion of blood.
I had long ago recognized the necessity
and begun to take off my coat
but he stopped me with a warning hand.
No, he said.
Today you must operate.
I shall provide.
You were weakened already.
As he spoke he took off his coat
and rolled up his shirt sleeve.
Again the operation.
Again the narcotic.
Again some return of colour to the ashy cheeks
and the regular breathing of healthy sleep.
This time I watched whilst
Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.
Presently he took an opportunity
of telling Mrs. Westernra
that she must not remove anything from Lucy's room
without consulting him.
That the flowers were of medicinal value
and that the breathing of their order
was part of the system of the cure.
Then he took over the care of the case himself
saying that he would watch this night and the next
and would send me word when to come.
After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep
fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse
for her terrible ordeal.
What does it all mean?
I'm beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane
is beginning to tell upon my own brain.
Lucy Westernra's Diary
17 September
Four days and nights of peace.
I'm getting so strong again that I hardly know myself.
It is as if I had passed through some long nightmare
and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine
and feel the fresh air of the morning around me.
I have a dim half-remembrance of long anxious times
of waiting and fearing.
Darkness in which there was not even the pain of hope
to make the present distress more poignant.
And then long spells of oblivion
and the rising back to life as a diver
coming up through a great press of water.
Since, however, Dr Van Helsing has been with me
all this bad dreaming seems to have passed away.
The noises that used to so frighten me
out of my wits, the flapping against the windows,
the distant voices which seemed so close to me,
the harsh sounds that came from I know not where
and commanded me to do I know not what
have all ceased.
I go to bed now without any fear of sleep.
I do not even try to keep awake.
I have grown quite fond of the garlic
and a boxful arrives for me every day from Harlem.
Tonight Van Helsing is going away.
And he has to be for a day in Amsterdam.
But I need not be watched.
I am well enough to be left alone.
Thank God for Mother's sake and dear Arthur's,
for all our friends have been so kind.
I shall not even feel the change,
for last night Dr Van Helsing slept in his chair
a lot of the time.
I found him asleep twice when I awoke.
But I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something
flapped almost angrily against the window panes.
The Pall Mall Gazette, 18 September.
The escaped wolf, perilous adventure
of our interviewer, interview with the keeper
in the zoological gardens.
After many inquiries and almost as many refusals
and perpetually using the words Pall Mall Gazette
as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the zoological gardens
in which the wolf department is included.
Thomas Builder lives in one of the cottages
in the enclosure behind the elephant house
and was just sitting down to his tea when I found him.
Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk,
elderly and without children.
And if the specimen I enjoyed of their hospitality
be of the average kind, their lives must be
pretty comfortable. The keeper would not enter
on what he called business until the supper was over
and we were all satisfied.
Then when the table was cleared and he had lit his pipe
he said, Now sir, you can go on
and ask me what you want. You'll excuse me
for refusing to talk of professional subjects
of four meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals
and the hyenas in all our section their tea
before I begins to ask them questions.
How do you mean ask them questions?
I queried, wishful to get him into a talkative humour.
Itn of them over the head
with a pole is one way,
scratching of their ears is another,
when Jens's flush wants a bit of shore for their gals.
I don't so much mind the fuss.
The itn of the pole part before I chucks in their dinner
but I awaits till they've had
their sherry and quaffy, so to speak,
before I tries on with the ears scratching.
Mind you, he added philosophically,
there's a deal of the same nature in us
as in them dear animals.
Here's you a common and arskin of me questions about my business
and I, the grump-like, that only for your
I'd have seen you bloat fuss before I'd answer.
Now even when you asked me me sarcastic-like,
if I'd like you to ask the superintendent
if you might ask me questions.
Without offence, did I tell you to go to hell?
You did.
And when you said you'd report me for using obscene language
that was itn me over the head.
But the arf quid made that all right.
I weren't going to fight
so I waited for the food
and did with my all as the wolves and lions and tigers does.
But, Lord, love your art.
Now that the old woman has stuck
a chunk of her tea cake in me
and rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot
and I've lit a hop,
you may scratch my ears for all your worth
and won't even get a growl out of me.
Drive along with your questions.
I know what you're coming at.
That ear escaped wolf.
Exactly, I want you to give me your view of it.
Just tell me how it happened
and when I know the facts, I'll get you to say
what you consider was the cause of it
and how you think the whole affair will end.
All right, Governor,
this ear's about the old story.
That ear wolf, what we call Bersiker,
was one of three grey ones that come from Norway
to Jamrocks,
which we bought off him four years ago.
He was a nice, well-behaved wolf
that never gave no trouble to talk of.
I'm more surprised at him
for one to get out
or any other animile in the place,
but there you can't trust wolves no more
nor women.
Don't you mind him, sir,
broke in Mrs. Tom with a cheery laugh.
He's got mind in the animiles
so long that blessed he ain't like an old wolf himself,
but there ain't no harm in him.
Well, sir, it was about
two hours after feeding yesterday
when I first ear my disturbance.
I was making up a litter with the monkey-house
for young Puma, which was ill,
but when I heard the yelping and howling,
I came way straight.
There was Bersiker, a tearing like a mad thing
at the bars if he wanted to get out.
There wasn't much people about that day,
and close at hand was only one man,
a tall, thin chap with a nook nose
and a pointed beard with a few white hairs
running through it.
He had a hard, cold look and red eyes,
and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was him
that was irritating that.
He had white kid gloves on, his hands,
and he pointed out to the animiles,
to me, and says, Keeper,
these wolves seem upset at something.
Maybe it's you, says I,
for I did not like the hairs as he'd give himself.
He didn't get angry, as I hoped he would,
but he smiled a kind of insolent smile
with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth.
Oh, no, they wouldn't like me, says.
Oh, yes, they would, says I,
imitating of him.
They always like a bone or two to clean their teeth
on about tea-time,
which you is a bagful.
Well, it was an odd thing,
but when the animiles sees us a-talking,
they lay down.
And when I went over to Bersicker,
he let me stroke his ears same as ever.
That there man came over and blessed,
but if he didn't put his hand in,
then stroke the old wolf's ears, too.
I care, says I, Bersicker is quick.
Never mind, he says, I'm used to him.
Are you in the business yourself, I says,
taking off my hat,
for a man what trades in wolves
and setterer is a good friend to keepers.
Norm, says he,
not exactly in the business,
but I have made pets of several.
And with that he lifts his hat,
as polite as a lord, and walks away.
Old Bersicker kept a-looking after him
till he was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner,
and wouldn't come out the whole evening.
Well, last night, so soon as the moon was up,
the wolves here began all a-howling.
There warn't nothing for them to howl at.
There warn't no one near,
except someone that was evidently a-calling a dog
somewheres out back of the gardenings in the park road.
Once or twice I went out to see that all was all right,
and it was.
And then the owlin' stopped.
Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look round
before it turned in and bust me,
but when I came opposite the old Bersicker's cage,
I see the rails broken and twisted about the cage and empty.
And that's all I know for certain.
Did anyone else see anything?
One of our gardeners was a-coming home
about that time from Harmony,
when he sees a big grey dog
a-coming out through the gardening edges.
At least so he says, I don't give much for it myself.
For if he did, he never said a word about it
to his missus when he got home.
And it was only after the escape of the wolf
that was made known, and we'd been up all night
a-hunting of the park for Bersicker,
that he remembered seeing anything.
My own belief was that the Harmony
got in his head.
Now, Mr. Builder, can you account in any way
for the escape of the wolf?
Well, sir,
he said with a suspicious sort of modesty,
I think I can,
but I don't know as how you'd be satisfied
with the theory. Certainly I shall.
If a man like you, who knows the animals
from experience, can't hazard a good guess
at any rate, who is even to try?
Well then, sir,
I accounts for it this way.
It seems to me that
that there wolf escaped
simply because he wanted to get out.
From the hearty way that both Thomas
and his wife laughed at the joke,
I could see that it had done some service before,
and that the whole explanation was simply
an elaborate sell.
I couldn't cope in badnage with the worthy Thomas,
but I thought I knew a sure way to his heart.
So I said, now Mr. Builder will consider
that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting
to be claimed when you've told me what you think will happen.
Right you are, sir, he said briskly,
you'll excuse me, I know,
for a chaffin of ye, but the old woman here
winked at me, which was as much as telling me to go on.
Well, I never,
said the old lady.
My opinion is this, that there wolf
was hiding of somewheres.
The gardener, what, didn't remember, said he was a galloping
northward faster than a horse could go, but I don't believe him.
For ye see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more
and no dogs does.
They not being built that way.
Wolves just find things in a storybook,
and I dare say when they gets in packs and does be chivy
and something that's more of feared than they is,
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up whatever it is.
But, Lord bless ye,
in real life a wolf is only a low creature,
not half so clever or bold as a good dog,
and not half a quarter so much fight in him.
This one ain't been used to fighting,
or even providing for his self.
More like he's somewhere round the park of hiding
and the shivering of, and if he thinks it all
he's still wondering where he's to get his breakfast from.
Or maybe he's got down some area
and is in a coal cellar.
My eye won't some cook get a rum start
when she sees his green eyes shining at her out of the dark.
If he can't get food he's bound to look for it,
and may have he made chance to light
on a butcher's shop in time.
If he doesn't, then some nursemaid goes out a walkin'
with a soldier leaving the infant in the purambulator.
Well, then I shouldn't be surprised
if the census is one baby the less.
That's all.
I was handing him the half-sovereign
when something came bobbing up against the window,
and Mr. Builder's face doubled its natural length with surprise.
God bless me, he said,
if there ain't old Bersicker come back by his self.
He went to the door and opened it,
a most unnecessary proceeding, it seemed to me.
I have always thought a wild animal
never looks so well as when some obstacle
of profound durability is between us.
A personal experience has intensified
rather than diminish that idea.
After all, however, there is nothing like custom,
for neither Builder nor his wife thought any more
of the wolf than I should of a dog.
The animal itself was as peaceful and well-behaved
as that father of all picture wolves,
Red Riding Hood's quantum friend,
whilst moving her confidence in masquerade.
The whole scene was an unutterable mixture
of comedy and pathos.
The wicked wolf that for a half day
had paralyzed London and set all the children in town
with a shivering in their shoes
was there in a sort of pentanent mood
and was received and petted
like a sort of vulpine prodigal son.
Old Builder examined him all over
with most tender solicitude,
and when he had finished with his pentanent said,
There, I knew the poor old chap
would get back into some kind of trouble.
Didn't I say it all along?
Here's his head all cut and full of broken glass.
He's been a-getting over some blooming wall or other.
It's a shame that people are allowed
to top their walls with broken bottles.
This here's what comes of it.
He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage
with a piece of meat that satisfied,
in quantity at any rate,
the elementary conditions of the fatted calf
and went off to report.
I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information
that is given today regarding the strange escapade at the zoo.
I was engaged after dinner in my study,
posting up my books which,
through press of other works,
and the many visits to Lucy
had fallen sadly into a rear.
Suddenly the door was burst open,
and in rushed my patient,
with his face distorted with passion.
I was thunderstruck for such a thing
as a patient getting of his own accord
into the superintendent's study is almost unknown.
Without an instant's notice he made straight at me.
He had a dinner knife in his hand,
and as I saw he was dangerous
I tried to keep the table between us.
He was too quick and too strong for me, however,
for before I could get my balance
he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.
Before he could strike again, however,
I got in my right hand,
and he was sprawling on his back on the floor.
My wrist bled freely,
and quite a little pool trickled onto the carpet.
I saw that my friend was not intent on further effort,
and occupied myself binding up my wrist,
keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time.
When the attendants rushed in,
and we turned our attention to him,
his employment positively sickened me.
He was lying on his belly on the floor,
licking up, like a dog,
the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist.
He was easily secured,
and to my surprise went with the attendants quite placidly,
simply repeating over and over again,
the blood is the life, the blood is the life.
I cannot afford to lose blood just at present.
I have lost too much of late for my physical good,
and then the prolonged strain of Lucy's illness
and its horrible phases is telling on me.
I am overexcited and weary,
and I need rest, rest, rest.
Happily, Van Helsing has not summoned me,
so I need not forgo my sleep.
Tonight, I could not well do without it.
Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp to Seward, Carfax.
Sent to Carfax, Sussex,
as no county given, delivered late by twenty-two hours.
Seventeen September, stop.
Do not fail to be at Hillingham tonight, stop.
If not watching all the time, frequently visit,
and see that flowers are as placed.
Very important, do not fail, stop.
Shall be with you as soon as possible after arrival, stop.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 18 September.
Just off train to London.
The arrival of Van Helsing's Telegram filled me with dismay.
A whole night lost, and I know by bitter experience
what may happen in a night.
Of course it is possible that all may be well,
but what may have happened?
Surely there is some horrible doom hanging over us
that every possible accident should thwart us
in all we try to do.
I shall take the cylinder with me,
and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph.
Memorandum left by Lucy Wisterner.
Seventeen September, night.
I write this and leave it to be seen,
so that no one may by any chance get into trouble through me.
This is an exact record of what took place tonight.
I feel I am dying of weakness
and of barely enough strength to write,
but it must be done if I die in the doing.
I went to bed as usual,
taking care that the flowers were placed
as Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.
I was waked by the flapping at the window,
which had begun after that sleepwalking
off the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me,
and which now I know so well.
I was not afraid,
but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in the next room,
as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be,
so that I might have called him.
I tried to sleep, but I could not.
Then there came to me the old fear of sleep,
and I determined to keep awake.
Perversely, sleep would try to come then
when I did not want it.
So, as I feared to be alone, I opened my door
and called out, Is there anybody there?
There was no answer.
I was afraid to wake Mother, and so closed my door again.
Then outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl
like a dog's, but more fierce and deeper.
I went to the window and looked out,
but could see nothing, except a big bat,
which had evidently been buffering its wings
against the window.
So I went back to bed again, but determined
not to go to sleep.
Presently the door opened and my Mother looked in.
Seeing by my moving that I was not asleep,
she came in and sat by me.
She said to me, even more sweetly and softly than her want,
I was uneasy about you, darling,
and came in to see that you were all right.
I feared she might catch cold sitting there
and asked her to come in and sleep with me,
so she came into bed and lay down beside me.
She did not take off her dressing gown,
for she said she would only stay a while
and then go back to her own bed.
As she lay there in my arms, and I in hers,
the flapping and buffeting came to the window again.
She was startled and a little frightened
and cried out, what is that?
I tried to pacify her and at last succeeded
and she lay quiet, but I could hear
her poor heart still beating terribly.
After a while there was a howl again out in the shrubbery,
and shortly after there was a crash at the window,
and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
The window blind blew back with the wind
that rushed in, and in the aperture of the broken panes
there was the head of a great, gaunt gray wolf.
Mother cried out in a fright
and struggled up into a sitting posture
and clutched wildly at anything that would help her.
Amongst other things she clutched the wreath of flowers
that Dr. Van Helsing insisted on my wearing
around my neck and tore it away from me.
For a second or two she sat up pointing at the wolf
and there was a strange and horrible gurgling in her throat.
Then she fell over as if struck with lightning
and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy
for a moment or two.
The room and all around seemed to spin
around.
I kept my eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back
and a whole myriad of little specks seems to come
blowing in through the broken window and wheeling
and circling round like the pillar of dust that the travelers
describe when there is a simoon in the desert.
I tried to stir, but there was some spell upon me
and dear mother's poor body, which seemed to grow cold
already, for her dear heart had ceased to beat,
weighed me down,
and I remembered no more for a while.
The time did not seem long,
but very, very awful,
till I recovered consciousness again.
Somewhere near a passing bell was tolling.
The dogs all around the neighborhood were howling
and in our shrubbery seeming just outside
a nightingale was singing.
I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror
and I could not speak.
I could not find weakness,
but the sound of the nightingale seemed like the voice
of my dead mother come back to comfort me.
The sound seemed to have awakened the maids too,
for I could hear their bare feet pattering outside my door.
I called to them and they came in,
and when they saw what had happened and what it was
that lay over me in the bed, they screamed.
The wind rushed in through the broken window
and the door slammed too.
They lifted off the body of my dear mother
and laid her, covered up with a sheet
on the bed after I had got up.
They were all so frightened and nervous
that I directed them to go to the dining room
and each have a glass of wine.
The door flew open for an instant and closed again.
The maids shrieked and then went in a body
to the dining room and I laid what flowers I had
on my dear mother's breast.
When they were there, I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to remove them.
And besides, I would have some of the servants
to sit up with me now.
I was surprised that the maids did not come back.
I called them, but got no answer.
So I went to the dining room to look for them.
My heart sank when I saw what happened.
They all four lay helpless on the floor,
breathing heavily.
The decanter of Sherry was on the table half full,
but there was a queer, acrid smell about.
I was suspicious and examined the decanter.
It smelt of laudanum.
And looking on the sideboard, I found that the bottle,
which mother's doctor uses for her,
oh, did use, was empty.
What am I to do? What am I to do?
I am back in the room with mother. I cannot leave her.
I am alone, save for the sleeping servants
whom someone has drugged, alone with the dead.
I dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl
of the wolf through the broken window.
The air seems full of specks
floating and circling in the draft from the window.
And the lights burn blue and dim.
What am I to do?
God shield me from harm this night.
I shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out.
My dear mother gone, it is time I go too.
Goodbye, dear Arthur,
if I should not survive this night.
God keep you dear,
and God help me.
End of chapter 11.